COVID-19 Drinking Water Survey 

Presentation Outline:

•	Background and Objectives
o	Why did we administer the survey?
o	How did we administer the survey?
o	What questions were in the survey and why?
o	What was the survey response?
	Small/Medium systems
	Large systems

•	Small/Medium system results
o	Systems in financial peril (includes statewide estimate)
	90/180 days
	Potentially impacted population estimate
	Follow up with survey respondents 
	Other noteworthy results (i.e., correlation with MHI, reserve levels, deferred maintenance, etc.)
	How did we ensure statistically valid results

•	Household Debt results
o	Total statewide household debt estimate
	Number of households with debt and median debt level plus distribution
	Geographic breakdown (show high debt concentration in LA)
o	Zip code level debt findings
	Areas where households have high levels of debt
	Areas with large numbers of indebted households
	Noteworthy demographic correlations
o	Other findings
	Water service debt vs. other charges on water bills
	Billing system limitations (i.e., inability to look at prior billing cycles)

•	Next steps
o	Uses of the data
o	Technical call 
o	Continue outreach to vulnerable systems

Data Analysis Questions:

1.	How many systems will likely require financial assistance to remain viable within 3/6/9/12 months?
2.	How many systems have depleted their reserve funds by 25/50/75/100 percent? Absolute dollar amounts, define bins, as percentage of average 2020 monthly expenses? Per connection would be comparable to other size systems, can check stats on which is more useful
3.	How many systems have suffered revenue losses of 25/50/75/100 percent compared to 2019?
4.	How many systems have secured loans or other short-term financing?
5.	What is the population served by systems with extreme/high/medium/low financial vulnerability? Criteria tied to number 1, amount of time before they are in financial crisis, use data from 2 and 3 to clarify level of financial vulnerability
a. What are the demographic characteristics of populations served by systems with extreme/high financial vulnerability? Characteristics in #11
6.	How many systems were unable to provide survey responses due to inadequate financial management (i.e., did not retain financial data from 2019)? Can we summarize why inadequate responses were provided? Need to review comments for explanations. Common categories? Missing revenue/expense data, reasons, Marielle does have master sheet
7.	What is the total amount of household water debt accumulated since the beginning of the COVID-19 emergency?
8.	What proportion of the household water debt is very high/high/medium/low? Also as a percentage of total service connections
9.	Which zip codes have large numbers of households with water debt? Percentage of total service connections
a. Within those zip codes, which have significant numbers of households with very high/high debt levels? Bins based on increments of $100, need to collapse into fewer groups
10.	What are the demographic characteristics of the zip codes with high numbers of households in debt and high levels of debt? Look at entire surveyed population in zip codes
11.	What correlations exist between key demographic variables (e.g., race, income, age) and water debt?
12.	What correlations exist between housing status (e.g., single-family/multi-family and owner/renter) and water debt?
13.	What correlations exist between current health and economic indicators (e.g., local/regional unemployment rates, COVID-19 prevalence) and water debt? Compare with number of households facing eviction
14.	How many water systems are applying late fees to households with water bill debt?
a. How many households have late fees added to their unpaid bill debt?
15.	How many systems are currently offering extended repayment options?
a. What population is served by those systems?

16.	How many small systems are financially connected with other small/medium/large systems and operated as a single entity? (Cal Water, Cal-Am, Golden State Water, Tuolumne Utilities District, Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency, others?) Some surveys had to be dropped since these systems are part of larger conglomerates/rate making areas. This could show the benefits of what we are trying to achieve through financial/managerial consolidations.

17.	For systems with combined bills, what proportion of total household debt is drinking water service debt?

18.	Loss of revenue due to loss of business customers, could be permanent, difference in revenue amounts from 2020-2019 vs total household debt, also compare with percentage of resid. commercial

19.	Information from comments about number of systems reporting household debt due to inability to shutoff customers, categories to describe comments
